I graduated in 1972, so my answer is very dated. However, Rice is one of the few colleges that have actual professors (rather than grad students) teaching introductory classes, so that is a big plus. Also the professors are readily available for questions during office hours and (sometimes) immediately after class. In addition, students often form study groups of 5 to 10 students to go over the lectures and compare notes so that no one misses out on a major point because they sneezed or (horror!) missed a class because they were sick. Also, professors have office hours available if there is an issue that you and your study group just can’t understand. Make an appointment. The professors are there to teach the students, not throw knowledge at them and hope they get it. They want you to be successful — if you put in the effort!
Any class from Mikki Hebl (sp?). A lot of the 101 level classes have great profs. Jorge Narbona (in the Spanish dept) is pretty great. I liked the ecology class where you basically walked around campus and learned flora/ fauna that way, although I don’t think barry sullender still does this. I’m a little old so hopefully others have good suggestions for you!
Since I graduated in 1974, most of the professors I took classes from are dead and the few that aren’t have retired long ago. My experience was that all the professors were very knowledgeable and more than willing to work with the students Take the courses that interest you. Work with your advisor to be sure you get what you need, and remember that Rice is extremely accommodating if you want to put together an interdisciplinary program of study. Just because they don’t have a dedicated department for your Desired degree, doesn’t mean they won’t or can’t design a program just for you. Unlike most universities, Rice is very flexible when it comes to helping students.
There are many good reasons :-) Here were some of mine:

1. When I visited Rice, my Dad asked one of the students something like "I hear all schools these days have grade inflation. Is that true at Rice?" And the response from random student working at the library was "Rice sets a high bar, but everyone helps each other get over that bar." This was so true in my experience -- my classes in ECE were challenging, collaborative and rewarding.

2. Ability to find mentors through the college system. I am now at a large state school, for grad school and I cannot believe how lucky I was to be to count top professors as my confidants and (dare I say) friends in college. Rice has the college system which means each student belongs to a "house" with specific masters (who are professors), RAs (who are affiliated with the university, but are not professors), and associates (again -- professors and university affiliates) who participate in college events. When I was making important life decisions, I was able to talk directly with professors who I had a strong relationship with.

3. Ability to find mentors through small classes. I was an engineering student. After my freshman classes, all professors knew my name (and the names of my peers). In grad school, my classes are bigger than the classes I had at Rice.

4. Quirky, social, interesting people. During my visit day, I found that all the people I spoke with were people I would want to be friends with. When I went to Rice I was not disappointed. Because of the college system, I am good friends with people with a variety of majors and interests. Not true for some of my friends who went to larger state schools.

5. Easy to do research. Again, speaking from an ECE perspective. It just took a few emails my sophomore year, and I was able to start working in a lab on science I thought was really cool! When I wanted to try something different my senior year, again, it just took a few quick emails.

6. Houston. I live in a perhaps more "desirable" location now, but Rice tries to bring out the cool in Houston. They frequently have free passes to the opera, ballet and symphony which I took advantage of and sorely miss :( There are also lots of great restaurants, lots of bands come through, and Houston is a drive away from some of the more "fun" TX cities (e.g., Austin). Also, Houston is hell in August/September, but October through mid April, the weather is usually quite nice, so don't let the heat scare you ;)

7. If you are interested in medicine, Rice (from what I know from having pre-med friends) is a great place to be. Rice consistently gets students into top med programs, and since it is across from the largest med center in the world, there are lots of opportunities to get involved.

8. Finally, Rice is a top university and you will get a great education there. I found the courses challenging, but I found that the professors really cared that I learned.

I could go on and on... Rice was a truly fabulous place for me to grow and learn. If you attend there, I hope you find the same. If not, I hope you find the same somewhere else.


Thats easy to answer. The people. Rice has the most dedicated, caring, well-educated and interesting faculty, staff and students you will ever meet. They're fun to be around, smart without being snobbish, a little crazy, no make that at least medium crazy, but hardworking and willing to lend a hand to anybody who needs help. Two days after Harvey hit, the admin office had more offers from alumni for places for faculty, staff and the few students who had water damage to stay than they had people who needed a place to stay. That was even before the rain stopped and before the admin office had a hotline set up. Rice is a big, sometimes rowdy, but always caring family. Go for the top-notch education and fall in love with the people.
Rice could be the perfect undergrad if you want to pursue a graduate school. Here are some reasons:

The academic rigor of Rice is very well-known in graduate schools through the nation. A well earned 3.5 GPA could go a longer way than a 4.0 at a smaller school where you can get A’s easily. Almost all majors are considered top-tier in the nation in terms of rigor and prestige.
The faculty is genuinely interested in their students. Their recommendation letters have a considerable impact, and they are well networked with reputable grad schools. Each professor is willing to spend their time helping students.
Research opportunities are tremendous. Since Rice is research-focused, you’ll get to experience what it’s like to be a grad student even before being a grad student. Some of my friends spent more than 2 years in a lab, which may be a rare phenomenon among other undergrad schools. This applies to natural sciences, engineering, humanities and social sciences alike. Texas Medical Center hosts tons of Rice students to do meaningful and impactful research, which is a golden opportunity if you’re pre-med.
Houston is rich with non-academic, non-Rice opportunities, which can be an important factor depending on your field. You may immerse yourself in part-time jobs if you want to gain experience, and if you’re undecided between a professional career and an academic career (which was my case), Rice will surely help you reach the ultimate decision.
Rice U is pretty well rounded in regards to its existing academic programs. I can’t think of a single “weak” academic department, though there are some clear strengths. In general, Rice is better known for its undergraduate programs, but the grad programs are also well regarded.

STEM is pretty much the bread and butter of Rice U. Id say its what most think of when they think of Rice. Within STEM its pretty safe to say that all programs are quite good and well regarded, but even among those there are definitely some that rise above the rest. The Bioengineering program is one of the most prestigious nationwide. Environmental and Chemical Engineering are also pretty strong. The rest of the engineering portfolio (Civil, Electrical, Mechanical, Materials) is still quite good and will likely still put you in the top tier of candidates for stellar jobs, grad school, post docs, etc. I hear at least a few engineers from here also make their way into lucrative Investment Banking / Consulting careers without a financial background.

Music and Architecture are other long term strongholds that Rice is known for. Both are very well regarded at the local and national level.

A relative newcomer (1974) is the School of Business (graduate only). This department has been rapidly increasing in both the rankings and overall prestige. Not as familiar with this department but id say worth a look if youre interested in a graduate business/finance program.

Hope this helps.
Assuming you’re enrolled at the Schar School of Policy and Government, where I studied when it was called the School of Public Policy, I have two suggestions for professors that aren’t to be missed.

Siona Robin Listokin-Smith teaches financial policy and economics. When I studied under her, she actually made pricing municipal bonds interesting. It was quite an achievement! Her lecture style is thoroughly engaging, and she’s among the most challenging professors I took. No class at Schar is intended to be easy, of course, but she works incredibly hard to get her students to overcome more difficult problems, concepts, and policy topics then they think they can handle. She also had a wonderful talent for guiding class discussion - she could read us beautifully, knew when to intervene and keep us on track, and could laugh with us, too. She was, quite simply, a sensational teacher - and you don’t always get that in grad school!

Jeremy Mayer teaches on foreign policy topics. He’s also quite personable and gave me among the harder challenges in my master’s program: a briefing paper of under 1,000 words, if memory serves, that had to apply a foreign policy concept to a contemporary problem in foreign policy. Having spent most of grad school with plenty of space to expand on my thoughts and arguments, being confined was tough! But it wasn’t just cutting down on his grading space: the fact is that policymakers in the real world aren’t going to read 10-page treatises, so staffers have to be prepared to be succinct. I enjoyed Dr. Mayer’s class immensely, and my only regret is that I didn’t take him sooner than my program’s last semester.
I was asked to answer so I'm going to try to find some flaws. It's quite hard to find them though. The school is excellent. It's in a safe area. They are very flexible if you want to substitute classes to still meet degree requirements with harder classes that you have more interest in. The campus could probably double the number of students and not seem packed.

So if I was deciding on this school or another maybe some negatives. On campus housing is very expensive compared to off campus - I lived in a “garage apartment” at some millionaires house maybe a 10m walk to campus and paid 1/2 what they charge. Houston is huge so not having a car is a drawback (I had a car). They do have shuttles though running constantly and at least 1x a week they'll take you to get groceries or other items you need for free. Maybe if you're out of shape you won't like the large campus. I loved the beauty of it and didn't complain.

What you WILL complain about is the temperature and humidity. So walking campus is nice with all the big trees providing shade but Houston gets really hot and it's close to Galveston beach (gulf coast) so it gets quite humid. You may arrive at class sweating living off campus. If you drive your walk is very far since it's by the stadium (far away from class unless you're a music student) but then again, the shuttles have AC and if you plan accordingly you can avoid sweating like crazy.

Another negative is it took them several months to apply credit from Wharton classes to my degree. Reasons cited include “we need to ensure the rigor is equivalent to Rice.” Lol so a top 5 business school doesn't have the rigor of yours. I ended up contacting a professor from U Penn in the business school and those credits were applied within a week. That was laughable.

More negatives? Well these apply to any top school. They expect you to learn everything on your own class is just a forum for discussion. AFTER you spent hours studying and figuring out the material. Yeah don't come unprepared. The library will become your resting place as you cram every day. Professors are there like any top school because they do solid research and some do classes just because it's required. Teaching is kind of a joke because you were a Validictorian right (haha)? You already know how to study and figure out everything on your own. That's what they expect. And don't submit an assignment that a PhD from MIT couldn't produce. Unless you want bad grades. It's not an easy school. The standards are extremely high. If you can't handle that go elsewhere.

But… I must note they let me skip a semester for a professional MS while I did a required internship without paying ANY tuition. That's kind of unheard of. I told them I was running out of money and had all the credits just not the 6 or 12 internship credits and they let me do it free. I even had my presentation and grading for the internship project in front of a PhD and industry panel with no fees. I still graduated. What other school would let you do that? None I'm aware of. They converted my required grades on the project to pass/fail instead of actual grades to bypass enrollment. Thanks Rice!
Afraid I can’t give much insight. I graduated 42 (!) years ago. Most of my professors are dead or even more demented than they were. I was in the architecture program which is well regarded, to the point where I probably couldn’t get in now. I’ve visited the campus a few times since then, but except for some of the older buildings, everything is different. Generally, I think the best things about Rice are still the same: the small size, the relatively good value, the college system, and the really bright students. The campus is a 300 acre park, and Houston has lots of resources if you can stand the climate.